"Ants, although they are individuals, live united, as one ‘superorganism’. Hordes of army ants can move and haunt like a single predator. It is possible because the group of individuals is so hyper connected that it behaves like one being - ants are kind of cells building one body. Some groups of cells are specialized to particular jobs, just like tissues in our organism. However, each ant is able to live on its own. For some reason ants don’t do that. They evolved from non-social insects, wasps, and became social. How does it work? Bullet ants, one of many species, live in a colony where most of the ants are female. The workers have basic shape and equipment that all ants have - a body in three segments locked in an exoskeleton, large mandibles, scent glands and antennae. Their colonies are small and each ant can hunt alone, even its length is about 2,5 centimeters. But it needs a much larger population to create a superorganism and long-legged ants are tackling that challenge. These ants are pretty fast, which help them to find things in the desert and bring them back before others know what happened. They live in a big colony with about 3000 workers and, of course, a queen. She is larger than the rest of the colony and she is supposed to be the one to reproduce. However, other ants are able to do that too - although it is considered as cheating and undermines the cohesiveness of the colony. They forage at night. Their lives are not easy since they have some rivals to fight with, such as red harvester ants. Those are equipped with stingers and the most powerful venom of any insect and also have the edge in numbers and organization. Additionally, their workers are all sterile, so they reproduce only through the queen. They also have wings and divide up to different jobs. There are patrollers, the foragers, the guards. They don’t get specific orders - they simply smell what is need to be done. Some ants, such as army ants, developed more sophisticated way of communication. In that species animals specialized to do certain jobs are different in their shape and size, big soldiers with fierce mandibles keep guard while smaller foragers sweep into the forest. They haunt maintaining almost constant contact with each other and following chemical trails. They overwhelm much larger insects and inject digestive enzymes that liquefy tissue so the prey falls into smaller pieces, easy to transport to the colony - not a nest, but a mobile mass of bodies. They travel in a very organised way; first most of the ants, checking the trail, then the queen, nursery workers convey youngs, scouts select a site for the new camp. In a single night they are able to travel about 90 meters. There is another ant society, even more complex and far more peaceful, the leaf-cutter ants. They are like one big herbivore. They live under the ground in a gigantic ant city and the citizens are the most specialized workforce of all ants: scouts (the superogranism’s eyes), tens of thousand foragers (the mouth). As you can simply guess, they cut the leaves and take them to the nest. What you wouldn't guess, is that the leaves are not for the ants but for the fungus that grows nowhere else. The fungus feeds the ants back, converting the leaves into a form that the ants can use. All these species recognize other ants either as their nest mates and collaborate with them or as their enemies and fight with them. But not the Argentine ants - thanks for humans, the most widely distributed ants on earth. When they meet an ant from another colony, far from theirs, they may not fight if they come from one super colony. However, if it happened that on the same street ants from two different super colonies meet, they would smell that difference and become foes. Fire ants came to a better strategy. They not only make an army of allies but also can completely merge into one nest, under one queen, as one gigantic super organism. If two colonies meet, the weaker one must surrender, so they can unite into one, stronger colony. That means that the sterile workers must decide which queen will reproduce for them and beat the other one. That also means that they can spread faster than we can stop them.
It is thought that tropical forests can exist as an alternative stable state to savanna. There-
fore, the cumulative effects of perturbation by climate change or human impact may lead to crossing of a tipping point beyond which there is rapid large-scale forest dieback that is not easily reversed. Empirical evidence for bistability due to fire-vegetation feedbacks relies on tree cover bimodality in satellite-observed data, but this may also be explained by spatial heterogeneity, or by biases in the data. Most modelling studies of alternative stable tree cover states have so far either relied on mean-field assumptions or not included the spatiotemporal dynamics of fire, making it hard to compare model results to spatial data. In this work, we analyse a microscopic model of tropical forest dynamics and fire spread, proposed by, to show how dynamics of forest area emerge from spatial structure. We find that the relation between forest perimeter and area determines the nonlinearity in forest growth while forest perimeter weighted by adjacent grassland area determines the nonlinearity in forest loss. Together with the linear changes, which are independent of spatial structure, these two effects lead to an emergent relation between
forest area change and forest area, defining a single-variable ordinary differential equation. Such a relation between pattern and dynamics offers falsifiable theoretical predictions of the bistability hypothesis that are more closely linked to the underlying mechanism than bimodality and provides a criterion for forest vulnerability."
